1 - Intro 
=========
Welcome back to computer vision.
today, we're going to continue talking more about filtering and
sort of finish up the basics about that, so
then next time, we can apply that to more complicated uses of filtering.
And we're going to start by developing some linear intuition.
And the reason linearity is important will become clear in a minute.
Let's do a little intuition.
So an operator, we'll call it H,
or a system, is called linear if two properties hold.
And for what I'm going to show now both f1 and f2 are going to be functions, and
a is going to be a constant.
So the first property is called additivity,
which is basically just that the things sum.
So if I have some operator, and I apply that to the sum of the two functions,
f1 plus f2, I just get the sum of the operator applied to each of the function,
looks a lot like the distributive law of addition and
multiplication, but that's additivity.
And the other one, which is sometimes called scaling property, but
is actually technical term I think is homogeneity of degree 1, is just that if
you multiply your function, in this case, f again, by a constant a, and
then apply H, what you get is a times H applied to f1, and so when you
multiply by a constant, that constant just propagates through in a linear way.
We do some multiplication, and then we sum them, and because multiplication and
addition both have these properties basically,
the filtering operations we're going to do are going to be linear.
And we're going to take advantage of that later.

2 - Linear Quiz 
===============
Question.
Which of these are not linear?
a) the sum, b) the max of a function, c) an average,
d) a square root, e) (b) and (d)

3 - Linear Quiz Solution 
========================
Okay, well that's pretty straight forward.
A sum, well a sums are sums are sums.
You know that's linear it's going to do the right thing.
A max of course doesn't change, right?
If I've got two functions and I'm taking the max it's determined by, sort of,
the single biggest value and the rest of the function doesn't matter.
And of course square root,
well that's not going to be linear because square roots are never linear.
I think you can figure that out.

4 - Impulse Function and Response 
=================================
What linearity is going to allow us to do is to build up a signal or
a function, remember an image, a piece at a time and
then be able to say how a linear operator affects that whole image.
Right? Because, basically the way both linearity allows us to say is if I
could sum up a bunch of things to make an image,
then if I apply a linear operator to that whole image, it's going to be
the same as the sum of applying that linear operator to each of the pieces.
And it let's us talk about things in an effective way.
So, to do that we need sort of these building blocks of a function.
And the building block of functions is what's referred to as an impulse.
And the impulse function in a discrete world is very easy to talk about.
It's a single point with a value 1, and it looks just like an impulse.
In the continuous world, an impulse is a little bit trickier because what
does it mean to be sort of at a single point width, you know,
it would have some amount 1, and that's where you have to turn on your calculus
hats just a little bit, no, I guess you put on your calculus hats, right?
And an impulse is actually a small, little signal whose area is 1.
Okay? So, and as the thing gets narrower and narrower in width,
it has to get taller in height in order to maintain that same area.
And in the limit what you get is an impulse.
So it's got 0 width and infinite height, but it's,
it's integral, it's area is 1, and that's what's referred to as an impulse.
We're going to mostly stay in the discrete world, so
we won't have to worry too much about that.
So the, the cool thing about an impulse is the following.
Suppose I've got some sort of a system, a black box.
So it's a function H, right?
So, sorry, it's an operator H.
And we don't know, actually, anything about it.
But if I put in an impulse, okay, so
I put an impulse into the system, I can see what comes out.
By the way, that response is called the impulse response.
Not, not all that clever, right?
So what's really cool is, if I know what the impulse response
of some black box H is, maybe we'll call that h of x, okay.
I can describe what this operators going to do by h of x.
The reason that works is the following.
Since any sequence of pulses here, and we're going to do this in 2D in a minute,
can be described by just adding in a shifted set and
scaled set of those single impulses.
If I know how this black box effects just the single impulse.
I'll be able to say how it affects the entire image.
Okay?
And that's why impulse responses matter.

5 - Filtering an Impulse Signal 
===============================
So, let's take a look at what an impulse response looks like in an image.
So here we have an impulse.
Okay, and so, here's our impulse, right?
It's just a single pixel with a value of one, okay?
And we're going to filter it with some kernel, h, okay?
Remember kernel mask,
thing that we're moving around in order to make our filter, so we have our H.
So the question is, what is the output?
And again, I want to thank Christin Gramen for having made these slides so
I can change them, steal them, move them around.
So first I put down my filter, and
you see my filter's over here like this, right?
So it doesn't hit that 1 at all, and so its value is just going to be a 0.
Fine, no big deal.
All right.
Now, move the filter over a little bit.
Well, it just pulls out the f here, right, so this
pixel right there pulls out the f so an f goes right there, in, in my result.
Move it over one more time, what do I get, I get the e.
Move it over one more time again, what do I get, I get the d.
So, you notice that even though the filter goes D-E-F, left to right.
In the image, what comes out is F-E-D, going the other way, and
that's just because of how this correlation pulled it up.
And it won't surprise you that it, not only does it flip it left and
right, it also flips it up and down.
And that's what happens when you do a correlational filter of a impulse.
Just because of the way you slide it over,
you'll end up flipping that entire response.
By the way, something that I was being implicit about is I was assuming that
this center of that filter was what we were calling the reference point, right.
So wherever the center was located, wherever that center pixel.
That was the one that was being entered into on the result.
Okay.
You could use a different point, but we're going to assume that the center pixel
is the reference pintal, pixel of the filter.

6 - Kernel Quiz 
===============
So here's a quick little quiz for you.
Suppose our kernel, our filter, the thing we're moving around,
was size M by M, right?
So maybe it was a five by five or
a three by three, so M would be three or five in that case.
And suppose our picture was N by N, maybe our picture is 100 by 100, or
1000 by 1000.
How many multiplies would it take to filter the whole image,
with that filter, all right?
Two M N.
M times M times N times 2.
M times N times N.
M times M times N times N.
Hallelujah singing something.
I don’t know it just seems like it had a rhythm to it there

7 - Kernel Quiz Solution 
========================
So let's think about it.
Well actually in fact, the answer, and
we would normally write it this way, M squared N squared right?
Because every pixel I have to multiply all of
the coefficients times the pixels that are underneath.
So there are M times N coefficients.
And I have to do that over all of the N times N pixels.
So the number of operations is on the order of M squared N squared,
which can get pretty large if M and N are moderate size.
Later we'll talk just a little bit
about what are called linearly separable filters.
We don't use them a lot anymore if you've got really fast computers, but it,
it can make things be much quicker.

8 - Correlation vs Convolution 
==============================
We had this problem, of when we put in through a correlation,
we got back out sort of this flip thing, all right.
And, if you remember,
here's the equation of correlation, we have this kernel H and we sum over it,
going from minus k to plus k, multiplying it times our image, and
what that did was it caused us to end up with that flipped result, all right.
The right way of thinking about this, is that, when an impulse comes in and
it hits the filter, what comes back out is sort of this, this reverse signal.
So, the, the right way of thinking about the operator is there's
something called convolution, and when we do convolution, that's what we
actually mean when we say we're going to apply this filter or this kernel, and
what convolution does, is it, flips both the left-right and
the up-down direction, you could have either flipped the kernel or
flipped the axis to the pixels, it doesn't matter, you would get the, the same
value, and, so that flipping gives you what's referred to as convolution.
So by the way, if I was using a Gaussian or
a box filter, how will the outputs be different for correlation and convolution,
that is what happens if I flip my Gaussian, answer, nothing, okay?
For a circularly symmetric or for a symmetric filter, whether I do convolution
or correlation doesn't matter, it is going to matter to us in the next lecture,
the one after that when we take derivatives in one direction or
the other, and that's when you have to be careful, but
if you have a symmetric filter, it doesn't matter.
So this can be illustrated nicely in the following way, so
here we have the, equation for
the convolution operator, and we're going to illustrate it like this, all right.
So here we have our filter and there's this little asterisk up here and
the asterisk is to show you sort of what the top right hand corner is.
When we do correlation, we just pick that up and then we sort of slide it
around, when we do convolution, what we do is we rotate, the thing, and,
because it essentially flips it left, right and up, down, right, you
see that the little asterisk is now down here in the bottom left hand corner.
Okay? And then, thank you, Kristin.
We zoom that all over the image and that gives you your output.
So, that's our convolution operator.
Again, the difference between correlation and convolution only matters if
you have an asymmetric filter but now you know the difference.
Like I say, convolution is actually sort of the physics, so
what's going on when you put an impulse through this response.

9 - Convolution Quiz 
====================
When convolving a filter with an impulse image,
we get back the filter as a result, right?
So in other words, by doing the convolution, we, we flipped it, and
then we rotate it and
it flips again, so I take an impulse, and I convolve it with H, I get back H.
All right, well then, how about the following?
If we convolve an image with an impulse, what would we get?
Well, A, a blurred version of the image.
B, the original image.
C, a shifted version of the original image.
And D, you have no idea.

10 - Convolution Quiz Solution 
==============================
So you don't get any credit for d.
You have, even if d is true, you have no idea.
You get no credit for d, all right?
The answer, actually, is the original image.
And the way to think about that is, when I was doing the convolution or
the correlation.
There’s really no distinction of what’s the image and what’s the filter, right?
It’s just an operation where I combine these things.
So, before when I was convolving an impulse with a filter and
getting back the filter.
We were thinking of the impulses, the image, and the, and
the filter as the filter.
But you could have just thought of as the filter as the image, and
the impulse is the thing you're doing the convolute, convolution with.
And basically all the impulse is doing out,
is pulling out the single pixel and sticking it in the results.
So when you can convolve something with an impulse,
you get back just the original image.

11 - Properties of Convolution 
==============================
All right.
One more thing.
In order for all of this to work, we need a pr-,.
a, a property called shift invariance.
And shift invariance is basically that your operator behaves
everywhere the same way.
So I have a couple of pixels over here on the left and I apply my operator.
If I had the same pixels over here on the right.
Oh, this is my left,
my right, your right, turn around, okay, or, look, never mind.
If I have them up and down, right.
If I have a couple pixels up here, and I apply a filter I get the same values if
I have a couple pixels down here and I apply a filter.
That means that I can shift things around and
do the addition, and get my entire image back.
As we said, because convolution or correlation are built on multiplication and
addition, these are linear operators,
making the whole notion of filtering a linear operation.
And this means that convolution has some very useful properties.
For example, it's commutative.
All right. So, f convolved with g is the same as g convolved with f.
Remember that whole idea about which is the impulse and which is the filter?
It's also associative.
So that here we, we wrote the associative property of convolution.
We're going to take advantage of that in just a minute.
It has an, a, a unit impulse.
It's the identity.
So that's what we talk about,
that if you convolve any function with the identity you get back that function.
And then here's a cool one.
Differentiation of course is just the limit of subtraction and then a division,
and a division is same as multiplication it's 1 over in that, in that case.
So differentiation is a linear operator.
Now you may have remembered that from calculus, right, so the derivative of
a times f, where a is a constant, was just a times the derivative of f.
And the derivative of f plus g was the derivative of f plus the derivative of g.
So, differentiation is also a linear operator.
And because of associativity we get this cool property here.
That the derivative of a convolution is the same as taking
the derivative of one of the elements and then convolving it with the second.
And we're going to make use of that when we do edge detection and
gradient finding in a little bit.

12 - Computational Complexity and Separability 
==============================================
I want to talk just a quick second about computational complexity.
Mentioned it before.
As we said, if your image is N by N and your kernel is M by M or
we will call it W by W for sort of width.
And it's easier to say W being different than N because [INAUDIBLE].
Exactly, okay?
So the question is how many multiplies do we need?
And we said before that we need N times N times W times W,
or N squared W squared.
Doesn't N squared W squared sound better than N squared M squared?
Because when I say N squared M squared you have no idea what I'm saying if I
say it quickly.
N squared W squared works.
And that can get sort of big.
So there's a cute little property.
Sometimes your main kernel, your, your filter,.
Can be created by convolving a single row with a single column.
And when that's true,
you can take advantage of the associative property, in terms of how we do this.
And this is what's refered to as a linearly separable kernel.
So let me show you an example.
So here we have a single column, and here we have a single row.
And just think of 0s being around it.
If I convolve this column by this row I would get out
this new H which has 1 2 1 2 4 2 1 2 1 in it.
Okay? So c convolved with r equals H.
See, this is why we don't use my handwriting.
Let's suppose we wanted to filter something with H.
All right?
So that would look like this.
We have a function G that we're going to create by convolving F with H.
But we said that C convolved R is the same as H, so that convolves F.
And because of the associative property,
C convolved with R then convolved with F.
In order to get our new function,
is the same as C convolved with R convolve with F.
And the reason that's better is that I can do
two column convolutions instead of one square.
So now instead of being W squared N squared it's 2 times W times N squared.
And that can be,
that used to be very important when computers were not quite as fast.
But it's still reasonably important, because for
example, if W is say a 31 by 31, that's a factor of 15 difference, all right?
So that's more than an order of magnitude.
Anytime you can do anything that buys you an order of magnitude for
not a lot of money.
You should go ahead and make that purchase.
Because orders of magnitude are hard to come by.
So here's a nice way of doing this.
So when we do various kinds of smoothing,
etc, often we use linerally separable filters and you can just apply them.

13 - Linear Operation Quiz 
==========================
Here's another quick quiz.
True or false?
Division is a linear operator.
Okay? A, false because X divided by Y plus Z
does not equal X over Y plus X over Z.
True, because X plus Y divided by Z is the same as
X divided by Z plus Y divided by Z.
And c, I have no idea.

14 - Linear Operation Quiz Solution 
===================================
Okay, again, C might be true, but it's false.
No, C is true, but you get no credit.
The answer is true, in this case, because it's division by a constant.
All right, so in this case, if I'm dividing by Z, so if I sum up X plus
Y divided by the Z, it's the same thing as X divided by Z plus Y divided by Z.
Much later we're going to be doing perspective projection, and you're going to
end up having to normalize the X and Y values, by the Z value of a point.
And then the Z is actually going to be a component of the element.
And since that component can change, that's not going to be a linear operation.
But in general, division is a fine linear operation because the last time I
checked, dividing by two is the same as multiplying by point five, and
multiplication is a part of the linear operation.

15 - Boundary Issues 
====================
&gt;&gt; One thing that comes up when doing filtering is what to do
about the boundaries,
because you might ask what happens when your filter falls off the edge.
&gt;&gt; What happens when your filter falls off the edge?
&gt;&gt; Meghan has been rehearsing this all week, outstanding.
Well, basically it's undefined until you define it.
All right?
So you have to think about what size operation you want, so
that can be illustrated like this.
Okay?
And here we're going to use a little bit of old MatLab nomenclature,
they've changed it, because the old MatLab nomenclature actually makes it clear.
So, here I've got a function f and I'm filtering it with g.
And you might try to think about well, what's the size output that I want.
And there's sort of three different possible sizes.
One is when g just touches that corner, I start to get a response.
So if I think of the center point of g as the reference,
I would actually get a box that's bigger than the original function.
Okay.
The flip side is if I want to make sure that all of g is actually touching f,
then I'm going to, again using the center point,
I end up with a smaller output than the original.
And that, that's used to be referred to as valid,
since all those points were in fact correct.
But the problem is when I filter a 55 by 55 image,
I'd really want to get back a 55 by 55.
I don't want to get back a 58 by 58 or a 52 by 52.
What I want is referred to as the same.
So here you see that we put that filter with its middle at the corners and
we get back the same size.
So the problem of course,
is what's underneath these pixels here that are sticking out?
And basically when you do filtering,
you have to tell the system what you want there.

16 - Methods  
=============
MATLAB has a couple of ways of thinking about how to do this, right?
And we're going to use, again, old MATLAB nomenclature, and
then I'll tell you about the new one.
So there are a couple of different methods.
The first method is called clip.
Clip basically means I assume that that outside boundary is black.
I then apply my filter, so here I can see my filter.
And when I pull out the image,
you can notice that this thing has gotten kind of dark at the edges.
And that makes sense because that black has leaked in, all right.
But that’s referred to as clipping.
Another method is called wrap around.
It’s kind of a weird method.
It has to do with some Fourier analysis that we’ll talk about later.
Basically it says that I assume my picture continues and wraps around.
Which means that you see this stuff filled in here?
That's the stuff that comes from this side of the picture.
It's easier to see up here, right?
These, these red peppers came from down here.
And the, the yellow straw comes from over there.
All right?
And that was under assumption that what you were actually looking at
was a periodic signal.
So if you were looking at a periodic signal.
The next thing that would happen would be the stuff that was at the start of it.
Well, in filtering, in image filtering, that doesn't work so well.
Here, I'm going to apply the filter, and
then I'm going to cut back to the original size image.
And you'll notice that there's some red stuff here.
Where did that red stuff come from?
Well, it actually came from the bottom because it got wrapped around.
There is a method that's called copy edge or
replicate where you just basically extend out, right?
So I just extend out the same value.
And then I run my filter and then I pull out my picture and
that's reasonable, okay?
The replicate method is a, is an easy one, and it gives you a reasonable result.
It basically says that the image sort of stays the same.
Now the problem is is that the statistics, of course, are different, right?
Because you had this nice varying image, and
then you make everything be sort of the same going out.
So, another method is called reflection.
Okay, are sometimes called symmetric.
And what that does is you, you reflect the image out.
And here, I just did that.
In fact, here let me draw right here.
Here's the reflected edge.
It's actually, if I erase it, hard to see that edge.
Right? Because I basically re, I, I take the image and I fold it back out again.
All right.
So, then I take that.
I apply my filter.
And then I pull out the image, and it actually does a pretty good job.
So, often you either want to do what's called replicate, or
copy, the edge or reflect across the image.
In new MATLAB these are expressed using this function called imfilter,
which comes from the Image Processing Toolbox.
And you can do you put in a value.
Puts that value in, so we put in 0, it's like clipping.
You can wrap around with circular and
then the copy edge is replicate and reflection is symmetric.
And typically, you'll use either replicate or symmetric.

17 - Explore Edge Options 
=========================
So which is your favorite option to deal with edge issues?
Load up the image package, read an image, create a gaussian filter.
Remember gaussians are special.
Now when you apply it, specify an edge parameter.
Passing in zero is equivalent to the default.
You can see the black seeping in along all the edges.
This is because we passed in zero.
What happens if we put in some other number?
Try it out.
What about circular?
If you look closely, you'll see the green seeping in on this side, and
a little bit of red on the opposite side.
Replicate.
Replicate is not too bad.
No obvious effects.
And lastly, symmetric, or reflect across edge.
Not bad either, actually not too different from replicate.
Feel free to experiment with these different options, filter sizes, and sigmas.

18 - Reflection Method Quiz 
===========================
The reflection method of handling boundary conditions is,
in filtering is good because.
A) the created imagery has the same statistics as the original image.
B) the computation is the least expensive of the methods.
C) setting pixels to zero is quick.
Or d) none of the above.

19 - Reflection Method Quiz Solution 
====================================
Well, C is true but irrelevant.
B is false but irrelevant.
A is the correcting thing.
The imagery that you create by doing that reflection has the same statistics.
And I guess I should have also written, no obvious edge induced.
Right? When I did that reflection,
it was actually hard to see where those edges were.

20 - Practicing with Linear Filters 
===================================
So the very last part of this lesson,
we'll do some simple analysis about what different filters we'll do, and
then we'll do more sophisticated filtering later.
Here we have a picture, there's the original one on the left,
somebody's eye, maybe you know whose eye it is,
and I convolve it with that filter that's an impulse, what do you get back?
Well what do you get when you convolve an image with an impulse,
you get the original, and there it is, it's no change, 'kay so
when you filter with an impulse, all right.
So here's a slightly interesting one, what happens if I've got an impulse but
it's actually not centered at the reference point but
it's shifted over right, by one.
Well what's going to happen is, when I place my filter down the, in the middle,
it's going to go get the fill, the pixel from the right, and
put that down at the reference point, then I move it over,
and I get the right, now whether I get the one on the right or
the left will depend on whether I'm doing correlation or convolution,
remember correlation I just move it around, convolution I flip it over and
then move it around, but what you're going to end up with is a shifted image, so
in this case you'll shift to the left if you're doing correlation, so
by shifting the impulse you get a shifted function, and
that's because the idea is that the center coordinate here is 0,0.
All right, what about this?
So now I've got all ones divided by 9 so
it's so it sums to 1, what is that going to look like?
Well, we've already seen that, right, that's just a, kind of a crummy
smoothing filter, it's a blur, all right, so I just get out the blurred eye.
All right, now comes something really cool.
All right?
What if my filter, is actually the combination of these two?
Okay?
This is essentially twice the impulse, minus the blur.
All right.
Now, this is still all linear, so, the output of applying this kernel,
where the kernel is made up of sums and multiplies, can just be done by
taking the sums of the original two outputs, and that would look like this.
And you'll notice, I'll show you a better example in a minute,
that it's kind of sharpened up the image, it's accentuated the differences, and
this is, drawing something like this, so here, this is filter is called,
a sharpening filter, and it's got these little parts that have to do with the,
the minus, and then the part in the middle.
And if I show this applied to the whole filter, okay, you'll see that,
and you, so, now you know whose eye it is, there is Einstein's eye and
you'll, and if you take a look on your screen,
you'll see that this one is a good deal sharper than the, than the previous one.

21 - Unsharp Mask 
=================
You have time for a quick story?
Okay, sure.
Anybody here ever use Photoshop?
Raise your hand.
In the older Photoshop or
even currently, they have something called the unsharp mask.
Okay?
And when you apply the unsharp mask, what does it do?
It makes it sharper.
Now you might ask,
why would you call an unsharp mask something that makes it sharper?
Don't ask.
Okay.
In the old days, like when you did things in a darkroom,
you were playing with light and you, chemicals, etc.
But you still actually able to add and subtract light.
So those of you have ever seen film knows that film were made out of
negatives, right?
And so that where it was dark, it would let out hardly any light and
where it was light it would let a lot and
then the, it would reflect on, it would be projected onto paper.
And then whenever a lot of light hit the paper, it would become black and
that's why you had to make it be a negative.
Some very clever photographer figured out the following.
Let's suppose I take a negative and then I put a piece of
wax paper over it and I put another piece of film underneath that.
Okay?
And I turn on the light for just a split [SOUND] second.
I will get a blurry negative of the original negative.
Okay?
Right? Because it, it becomes a negative, it's a piece of film, so
I, I put the, the good negative, the sharp negative piece of wax paper and
then another negative and there are other ways of making it.
But the idea is that I would get a blurry negative of the negative, okay?
So if the negative were all white, this negative would now become all black.
All right?
It was the negative value.
Then what you could do is you'd develop that film, et cetera.
You could put that blurry negative of the negative in
with the original film and expose it at one shot.
And the math that was being done was exactly this math.
We had our original and because it's a negative of it,
we're subtracting off a slightly blurry version of the picture and
that would give you a sharper picture.
So that's how you did image processing with chemicals and
film to make a sharper picture.
And what do you think that extra negative that you made, okay?
That was blurrier was called, it was less sharp.
It was the unsharp mask and it would be added to the original picture.
And the unsharp mask would yield for you sharper picture.
So now you learned something totally irrelevant,
because you probably haven't even seen a piece of film.
But it is why in software today, unsharp masks make pictures sharper.
And now you actually know why, why the math works.
Right? You're essentially subtracting off a slightly blurry version of
the image.

22 - Filter Quiz 
================
&gt;&gt; Here's a quick quiz.
If a filter's coefficients don't add up to 1,
they can be corrected by multiplying by the necessary scale.
&gt;&gt; Right, you can just multiply them through by whatever it takes, all right?
&gt;&gt; Or, the resulting image could be multiplied by the square root of
that number after the operation to compensate for the horizontal and
vertical application of the filter.
A, true.
B, false.

23 - Filter Quiz Solution 
=========================
Of course it's false!
Look, if the thing needs to be multiplied by, 2.5 to make everything sum to 1,
then that 2.5 can be applied to the filter or it can be applied to the image.
Not 2.5 squared, or something like that.
because remember, linear scaling,
linear multiplication, just passes right through these linear operations.

24 - Different Kinds of Noise 
=============================
So we said, and we talked about this two times ago
that Gaussian averaging was a reasonable thing to do.
If the noise was independent in each pixel and was centered about 0.
So that it like, the noise is created by a Gaussian process.
So some were positive, some were negative, etc.
And now we've talked a little bit about how they're doing the filtering.
But there are other kinds of noise as well, and
we need different kinds of filtering.
Maybe not a linear filter.
That's why it's at the end of this lesson.
Just to show you something that's not linear, but an effective filter.
Okay. So on the left here,
we have that pepper image with a little bit of Gaussian noise added.
And on the right, we have the pepper image with the salt and pepper noise.
Different peppers.
Peppers as in good peppers to eat with salt and
pepper noise, which spicy pepper black.
The question is what kind of filtering might you need to use on
the right hand side, okay?
So the way to approach this is to remember that our other
assumption about images, right?
Is that the underlying image change slowly around the pixel.
So the idea is that if there's some sort of arbitrary value.
That was put in some location as what happens in salt and pepper noise.
How could we go about finding the value that we
should replace that value with to make a better picture?
Now remember, when we were doing the filtering, this blurring.
We were essentially replacing the pixel values by the local average.
And it was either a box average or a Gaussian average.
And that was fine when the noise was not a huge amount of noise and
it tended to go to 0.
So by averaging, you tend to average away the noise and
get about the right value of pix, of, of the pixel.
But if a few sort of totally random values are being injected into your image.
You really need to do something different.
And as some of you know is when I have sort of these very spurious values.
An interesting way of, of, coming up with sort of the appropriate middle value,
is not an average, but a median.

25 - Median Filter 
==================
Here I'm going to show you a median filter and image processing.
At the top here, we have a chunk of our image and
notice that in the middle is a pixel that probably is not right.
Probably is a piece of salt.
All right.
Because there are all these other lower numbers and then poof a 90.
So the question is, what should we replace that with?
If we just do the regular filter, then we would take the local average of
everything, including the 90, and stick that there.
A better idea is to do a median filtering.
So we sort all those pixels.
Whoops, I left out the 10.
There we go.
And we pull out the middle value, the 27.
And we replace that here.
So now you see the 90 is totally gone.
The 27 happens to be replicated.
We don't care.
But the idea is that we replace that pixel with this median value.
So before you're gone, we ask some questions about that.
First of all, what's kind of nice is every value we put in
the picture was present locally.
Especially if it's odd.
If it's even, then it's the average of the two,
but if it's an odd number of pixels,
the median is one of those pixels whose value is somewhere around me.
So I'm not introducing any sort of really weird values.
So that's good for when I have these weird spikes, like this salt and
pepper, but here's a question for you.
Is it a linear operation?
What do you think Megan?
&gt;&gt; No?
&gt;&gt; Good. Yeah.
Right. No, look median is not a linear thing right.
I add in a couple different things.
I summed them up and the median can move however the median going to move.
It's not going to behave nicely.
So what is this look like in a real picture?
So here we have our pepper image.
So here is the salt and pepper version of it.
Again, different peppers.
And here it is with the median applied.
If you zoom on that you'll see that that's a really well cleaned up image.
And you can see,
this was a scan line, the plot of a single row across the image.
And you can see all the salt and no pepper noise.
And when I replace that with the median, I get a much nicer signal over here.
And that's why median filtering works so much better for salt and pepper noise.
So I'm showing you this because the median is really an example of
a non-linear thing.
It's also sometimes refered to as edge preserving.
And the reason for that is shown on this simple drawing here.
Suppose I have, I've got a signal that's supposed to be like this but
there was a single spike added to that.
If I take the median, I get this nice effect.
This thing comes here, this, et cetera.
If I were to take the mean or the average or a blur.
I would tend to blur across that nice sharp edge and
that's why median filtering is referred to as edge preserving.
And so this is class of nonlinear filters that are useful but
they're a little less well behaved in terms of the mathematics.

26 - Apply a Median Filter 
==========================
Let's apply a median filter.
As usual, load an image.
Let's add some salt and pepper noise.
Octave and Matlab have some great utility functions, like imnoise.
You pass in an image, and then the type of noise you want, and a parameter.
Here's some salt and pepper on the moon.
This time we won't use imfilter.
Remember that median filtering is a non-linear technique.
We use the function medfilt2, which stands for
median filtering in two dimensions.
As you can see, a median filtering is really effective in removing salt and
pepper noise.
A little bit of blurring has occurred, but not too much.
Try it for yourself.

27 - End 
========
So this is the end of the, the lesson.
Mostly what we've just talked about is so
you understand more about correlation and convolution.
Remember, correlation we take the filter straight, convolution is it's
the 180 degree rotation so it's both left, right and up and down.
Most of the time if we're using symmetric,
when we're using symmetric filters it doesn't matter.
But if we're taking derivatives, right, so the derivative in the x direction,
there's actually a positive direction versus negative direction.
That's when you do have to
worry a little bit about correlation versus convolution.
And most importantly, filtering is going to be an important tool, sort of, in
your toolbox for how to deal with images and get out the elements that you need.
And we'll do more of that over the next time.
And then again, much later, when we're trying to compute features over images.

