Introduction to Computer Vision
================================

What is Computer Vision
-----------------------

Computer vision is the study of how to build machines that **interpret** images —
extracting information and knowledge, not merely processing pixels. The goal is
image and video understanding: labeling objects in a scene and tracking them
as they move. This goes beyond image processing (images in → images out);
computer vision produces *meaning* from images.

Applications include analyzing street scenes for autonomous vehicles,
interpreting medical images such as X-rays, and recognizing actions in video.

Computer Vision vs Computational Photography
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Computational photography** focuses on *capturing* light from a scene to produce
photographs or novel visual artifacts. Image analysis supports capture and display
in new ways — it is partly about building new cameras and software.

**Computer vision** focuses on *interpreting and analyzing* scenes: identifying
who and what is present, and what is happening. The two fields overlap,
especially in foundational image-processing modules.

Why Study Computer Vision
--------------------------

Images and video are ubiquitous in modern technology. Key application domains:

- **OCR** — license plate readers, handwritten check amounts, postal ZIP code
  recognition. Once considered hard, now standard (built into scanners and
  Adobe Acrobat).
- **Face detection and recognition** — consumer cameras detect faces, detect
  blinks (Fuji), trigger on smiles (Sony Smile Shutter), and perform
  camera-based login via face recognition.
- **Object recognition** — retail loss-prevention (Evolution Robotics LaneHawk),
  augmented reality on mobile devices, Google Glass.
- **Special effects and 3D modeling** — face scanning, motion capture
  (e.g. *Pirates of the Caribbean*), structure-from-motion for aerial 3D
  reconstruction (Google Earth, Microsoft Virtual Earth).
- **Autonomous vehicles** — Mobileye pedestrian detection, sign recognition,
  automatic braking. Stanford's *Stanley* won the DARPA Urban Grand Challenge;
  Google's self-driving car program followed.
- **Sports** — Sportvision first-down line in American football uses
  player/background segmentation to overlay graphics without occluding players.
- **Vision-based interaction** — Nintendo Wii (IR camera tracking), Microsoft
  Kinect depth sensor with real-time skeletal estimation via machine learning,
  enabling gesture-based UIs and robot interaction.
- **Surveillance** — crowd safety monitoring, port security (Siemens).
- **Medical imaging** — registering 3D models (MRI/CT) with live surgical views
  for augmented reality during surgery.

Why Computer Vision is Hard
----------------------------

Seeing is not the same as measuring pixel values. The visual system constructs
a **percept** — an interpretation that goes beyond raw measurements.

Adelson's Checker Shadow Illusion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In Adelson's checkerboard illusion, squares A (in light) and B (in shadow)
emit identical photon counts, yet humans perceive A as dark and B as light.
The brain infers a checkerboard pattern under a cast shadow and
"corrects" perceived lightness accordingly. A photometer measures equal
intensity; the human visual system overrides this with scene understanding.

Perception is Active Construction
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

- **Shadow and motion**: a ball following the same trajectory appears to move
  into the background when its shadow moves with it, but appears to *rise*
  when the shadow moves sideways. The ball's image motion is identical in
  both cases; only the shadow differs.
- **Implied 3D from shadows**: a static green rectangle appears to lift off a
  checkerboard when dark pixels (interpreted as cast shadows) shift beneath
  it — even though no green pixels move at all.

These demonstrations show that human vision resolves ambiguity by constructing
scene descriptions. Computer vision must similarly build descriptions from
measurements, going beyond pixel-level image processing.

Course Structure
-----------------

The course is organized around three interrelated perspectives:

1. **Computational model** — the mathematical theory explaining *why* a
   computation is possible (e.g., epipolar geometry for stereo depth).
2. **Algorithm** — a concrete procedure implementing the theory under specific
   assumptions (e.g., patch correlation along epipolar lines using SSD).
3. **Real images** — applying algorithms to actual imagery, where practical
   issues (noise, occlusion, texture) require experimentation and tuning.

Problem sets bridge theory and practice: implement algorithms, apply them to
real images with ground truth, and evaluate accuracy.

Topic Outline
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

1. Image processing fundamentals
2. Camera geometry and models
3. Multiple views and their relationships
4. Features — computing and matching across images
5. Image formation, lightness, and brightness
6. Motion in images (optical flow)
7. Object tracking
8. Classification and recognition (basic pattern recognition, with deeper
   methods requiring additional machine learning)
9. Miscellaneous practical topics
10. Human vision system
